# canvasgrading

This repo contains several scripts that use the Canvas API to manage
quizzes and assignments on Canvas.

All scripts will receive an argument that is based on an access token
associated to your account (https://canvas.ubc.ca/profile/settings,
see Approved Integrations). This token can be provided directly as a
string in the command-line using the `-t TOKEN` option, or saved into
a text file and provided with the `-f TOKENFILE` option.

All scripts will also include an optional argument: `-c COURSE`,
corresponding to the ID of the course on Canvas. If you don't specify
it, the script lists all courses you have access to and asks for a
course. The ID can be obtained by looking at the URL on Canvas, it's
the number after 'courses/'.

All scripts that involve quizzes will also include the `-q QUIZ`
argument, corresponding to the ID of the quiz.  If you don't specify
it, the script lists all quizzes from the course you selected and asks
for a quiz. The ID can be obtained by looking at the URL on Canvas
when you open the quiz, it's the number after 'quizzes/'.

For assignment-based quizzes, the `-a ASSIGNMENT` argument is also
provided and works in the same way as the quiz argument above.

Please submit any questions or comments to jonatan@cs.ubc.ca.

## quiz2pdf.py

This is a script that converts a Canvas quiz to a PDF suitable for
Gradescope. In addition to the `-t/-f`, `-c` and `-q` arguments listed
above, it also receives the following arguments, all optional:

1. `-l CLASSLIST`: The name of a classlist CSV file containing at
least the columns SNUM and ACCT. You can generate it on the department
computers with a command like: `classlist <course_num> -T -f
"%SN,%ACCT"`. If provided, the PDF will use the student account as
identifier in the first page. If not provided, the PDF will use the
student's name and student number for identification. Note that, due
to FIPPA, the name/student number option is only suitable for use in
gradescope.ca, though its use gives significantly better recognition
by Canvas automatic matching algorithm.

2. `-p PREFIX`: A string used as prefix for the output
files. Can also be used to specify a different directory to store the
data in (e.g., `~/cs299/Final/FinalExam`). If not specified, a prefix
is generated based on the quiz name, removing any non-alphanumeric
characters (spaces, etc.).

3. `--only-question QID QID ...`: A list of question IDs to
include. If not specified, all questions are included. The ID of the
question can be obtained by running this script with all questions
(without this argument), the number provided before the text of each
question is the question ID. Alternatively, you may obtain the
question ID by using the JSON sync script below.

4. `--not-question QID QID ...`: A list of question IDs to exclude. If
not specified, all questions are included. The ID of the question can
be obtained by running this script with all questions (without this
argument), the number provided before the text of each question is the
question ID. Alternatively, you may obtain the question ID by using
the JSON sync script below.

5. `-d`: Enter debug mode. In this mode, only the first 10 submissions
are loaded from Canvas, and an extra `debug.json` file is
generated. This can be used to test the configuration, style or the
script itself.

6. `--css`: An additional CSS file to be used for this quiz. The
existing `canvasquiz.css` file in this repo is always added, this CSS
file can be used for question-specific or exam-specific formatting.

7. `--template-only`: If provided, only the template is created, with
no student submission.

The script requires the use of the `weasyprint` Python library, which
can be installed with:

    pip3 install --user weasyprint

The script will connect to the Canvas API to get the latest responses
from Canvas itself. The program will generate a file
`XXX_template.html` and `XXX_template.html.pdf`, where `XXX` is the
string from the first argument; the PDF file can be used as a template
for a quiz on Gradescope. The script will also create a series of
files named `XXX_exams_YY.html` and `XXX_exams_YY.html.pdf`, where YY
is a counter; each file contains up to 20 exams, which can be uploaded
to Gradescope as exams.

The script also creates a file named `XXX_raw_answers.zip` containing
a file for each essay question in the quiz. For quizzes with multiple
attempts allowed, these files will be created for all attempts. This
file is named `answer_<QID>_<STUD>_v<ATT>.html`, where `<QID>`,
`<STUD>` and `<ATT>` are the question ID, student number (or account)
and attempt number, respectively. These can be useful in cases where
either the answer is too long to fit in a PDF page, or if the marker
wants to copy that answer to test it (e.g., in an IDE). Also, for all
file upload type questions, the uploads will be saved in the same
file, in a file named `answer_<QID>_<STUD>_v<ATT>_<FN>`, where FN is
the file name originally used by the submitter.

The script supports all question types allowed in Canvas classic
quizzes, including text-only, essay, file upload, fill-in the blank
(or multiple blanks), multiple choice (including true/false and
multiple answers), multiple dropdowns, matching, numerical answers and
formula (calculated) questions. It also supports question groups, in
which case each question version is saved in a different page, and any
question submission that doesn't include a specific question will list
the answer as "NO SUBMISSION", with an explanation text. For file
upload questions, the answer will list the file names included in the
answer, which can be found in the raw answers file listed above. For
all other questions, the answer will be listed in the PDF itself. If
the question plus answer don't fit a single page, it will be
truncated, and you may find the answer in the raw answers file above.

Given some limitations of the Canvas API, this script does not support
question groups linked to question banks. If using question groups,
the questions must be included in the quiz itself instead of in the
bank only.

## quiz2txt.py

This script generates a ZIP file containing HTML files for each
essay-type answer, as well as file uploads. It receives arguments
`-t/-f`, `-p`, `-c`, `-q`, `-d`, `--only-question` and
`--not-question`, with the same format and meaning as the equivalent
arguments in `quiz2pdf.py` above.

The script will connect to the Canvas API to get the latest responses
from Canvas itself.  The script also creates one ZIP file per
question, named `<XXX>_<QNAME>_<QID>.zip`, containing a file for each
essay question in the quiz, where `<XXX>`, `<QNAME>` and `<QID>` are
the prefix, question name and question ID, respectively. This file is
named `<QID>_<STUD>_v<ATT>.html`, where `<QID>`, `<STUD>` and `<ATT>`
are the question ID, student number and attempt number,
respectively. Each answer will also include the question itself at the
top of the file. For quizzes with multiple attempts allowed, these
files will be created for all attempts. Also, for all file upload type
questions, the uploads will be saved in the same file, in a file named
`<QID>_<STUD>_v<ATT>_<FN>`, where FN is the file name originally used
by the submitter.

In addition to the answers, the ZIP files can also create a rubric
file for every student. In that case, a template must be provided for
each question, with the name `<XXX>_rubtempl_q<QID>.txt`. For question
groups, this rubric may be named `<XXX>_rubtempl_qg<QGID>.txt`, where
`<QGID>` is the question group ID. This template will be copied as is
to the ZIP file, once for every submission, with the name
`<QID>_<STUD>_v<ATT>_rubric.txt`.

Unlike `quiz2pdf.py`, this script supports question groups linked to
question banks.

## json2quiz.py

This script can be used to read, change and push changes to Canvas
quizzes using JSON files. This can be suitable for cases where
changing a quiz on a text editor is easier, or to create
quizzes/questions programatically.

The script receives arguments `-f/-t`, `-c` and `-q` as described
above. It also receives a required argument (positional, i.e., with no
prefix required) corresponding to the JSON file to use for
synchronization. The script can work in one of three ways:

1. If the `-l` option is provided, the quiz is loaded from Canvas and
saved into the JSON file.

2. If the `-p` option is provided, the JSON file is read and pushed to
Canvas as a new or updated quiz.

3. If both the `-p` and the `-l` options are provided, then both
operations are performed: the Canvas quiz is updated based on the JSON
file, and the new values from Canvas (including IDs) are loaded back
to the JSON file.

In addition to the options above, the `-s` option (used when `-l` is
provided) controls the format of the output JSON file. If not
provided, all fields received by the Canvas API are saved into the
JSON file. If the option is given, only the fields that can be sent
back to Canvas for updates are kept, as well as the IDs for
information only.

The `-d` option is also provided to enter a debug mode, though at this
point it provides no functionality.

The script can update existing questions, which can be done by simply
changing the values associated to the question without changing its
key. It can also create new questions, by creating a new item in the
JSON file with a key not currently associated to an existing question
or group (e.g., a non-numeric key). The script currently has no
support for deleting questions.

Question groups are also supported, but only if there is at least one
question in the group. Due to limitations of the Canvas API, question
groups with no question directly associated to the group cannot be
loaded from Canvas. This includes groups linked to question banks,
even if the question bank has questions. To add a question to an
existing group, use the group ID itself in the 'quiz_group_id'
field. It is also possible to create new groups, in which case a
non-numeric string should be used as a key, and questions to be added
to that group should use the string key as group ID. You are strongly
encouraged to maintain at least one question associated to each group,
as groups with no question can't be loaded back to the file.

It is also possible to reorder items in the quiz by changing the
'order' item. Note that the name used in this item is for information
purposes only, and will be ignored during updates.

## dupquiz.py

This script duplicates an existing quiz on Canvas onto a new quiz with
the same properties and the same questions. The script receives
arguments `-f/-t`, `-c` and `-q` as described above, where the `-q` ID
corresponds to the source quiz. The title of the new quiz is the same
as the original quiz, adding the suffix " (copy)".

By default, the new quiz is created as unpublished. If the
`--published` option is provided, the quiz is instead created as
published.

If the `--practice` option is provided, the quiz is changed to be a
practice quiz. This means that the title receives the suffix "
(Practice Version)" instead of copy. Some changes are also done in the
quiz properties, such as removing the due date and lock date, setting
the release date to the lock date of the original quiz, removing time
limits and attempt limits, and allowing correct answers to be shown on
submission.

## pushquizgrade.py

This script pushes quiz grades based on a CSV file. Documentation
pending.

## pushasggrade.py

This script pushes assignment grades from a CSV file to a Canvas
rubric associated to an assignment. Documentation pending.

## License

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).
